# Milestone 1

Here is everything that was achieved in Milestone 1 (plutus implementation in Rust).

To follow along, clone the repository.
```shell
git clone https://github.com/carloskiki/pallas-extras.git
```

The implementation is available under the `plutus/` directory,
```shell
cd pallas-extras/plutus
```

The tag `M1` points to the commit that marks the end of Milestone 1.
```shell
git checkout tags/M1
```

From here, all proofs of achievement can be generated, but can also be found online.
To generate the artifacts locally, a rust toolchain is required.

## Docs

The documentation for this crate is available as a [github page](https://carloskiki.github.io/pallas-extras/plutus/index.html),
and can also be generated locally with
```shell
cargo doc --open
```

The internals are also documented. The docs can be generated with the `--document-private-items` flag.
```shell
cargo doc --document-private-items --open
```

## Tests

The tests can be run with
```shell
cargo test
```
On every change to `main` CI runs these tests. The latest CI conformance run for `M1` can be found
[`here`](https://github.com/carloskiki/pallas-extras/actions/runs/22123125162/job/63947429426).

A coverage report is available on [codecov.io](https://app.codecov.io/gh/carloskiki/pallas-extras/tree/main/plutus).
Note that the overall coverage percentage covers the full workspace, which is out of scope for this milestone.
As can be seen by following the link, the coverage for the `plutus` crate is above 90%, which surpasses the 80% goal.

Coverage can also be generated locally with
```shell
cargo llvm-cov --open
```
Note that this generates a report including dependents of the `plutus` crate in the workspace. Only the lower
section of the report covers the `plutus` crate (rows prefixed with `plutus/`).

### Fuzzing

A fuzzing target is available. To run it, `cargo-afl` is required.

First, go into the fuzz target directory and build it.
```shell
cd fuzz && cargo afl build
```

Then, the fuzzer can be run on the already provided corpus with
```shell
cargo afl fuzz -i corpus -o findings target/debug/fuzz
```
The fuzzer will run indefinitely. You can stop it with `Ctrl+C`.

The [`stability_report.txt`](/plutus/fuzz/stability_report.txt) file contains the results of running the
fuzzer for 1219374 executions. Zero hangs, panics or crashes were found during that run.

Once done, move back to the `plutus` directory.
```shell
cd ..
```

## Benchmarks

The benchmarks performed cover all validation benchmarks from `IntersectMBO/plutus/plutus-benchmark`,
which represents a variety of real scripts found on-chain.

The benchmarks are found under the `benches/` directory.
To match the reference implementation, the benchmarks are separated into two groups: `decode` and `full`.
As the names suggest, `decode` only measures the time taken to decode the script, while `full` measures both
the decoding and validation time.

The benchmarks can be run with
```shell
cargo bench
```
A [table](/plutus/benches/results.md) is provided that compares the results of the benchmarks with the reference
implementation and another alternative implementation. This implementation is much faster than expected.
It surpasses the reference implementation in all benchmarks except one, sometimes being more than twice as fast.
